-----
0.10x
-----

0.10.8 (2007-04-01)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Fixed issue with long form of switches.

0.10.7 (2007-02-20)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Applied #1647875 Add ``const`` to ``yybm`` vector.

0.10.6 (2006-08-05)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Fixed #1529351 Segv bug on unterminated code blocks.
- Fixed #1528269 Invalid code generation.

0.10.5 (2006-06-11)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Fixed long form of ``-1`` switch to ``--single-pass`` as noted in man page and help.
- Added MSVC 2003 project files and renamed old 2002 ones.

0.10.4 (2006-06-01)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Fix whitespace in generated code.

0.10.3 (2006-05-14)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Fixed issue with ``-wb`` and ``-ws``.
- Added ``-g`` switch to support gcc's computed goto's.
- Changed to use nested ``if``'s instead of ``switch(yyaccept)`` in ``-s`` mode.

0.10.2 (2006-05-01)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Changed to generate ``YYMARKER`` only when needed or in single pass mode.
- Added ``-1`` switch to force single pass generation and make two pass the default.
- Fixed ``-i`` switch.
- Added configuration ``yyfill:enable`` to allow suppression of ``YYFILL()`` blocks.
- Added tutorial like lessons to re2c.
- Added ``/*!ignore:re2c */`` to support documenting of re2c source.
- Fixed issue with multiline re2c comments (``/*!max:re2c ... */`` and alike).
- Fixed generation of ``YYDEBUG()`` when using ``-d`` switch.
- Added ``/*!getstate:re2c */`` which triggers generation of the ``YYGETSTATE()`` block.
- Added configuration ``state:abort``.
- Changed to not generate ``yyNext`` unless configuration ``state:nextlabel`` is used.
- Changed to not generate ``yyaccept`` code unless needed.
- Changed to use ``if`` instead of ``switch`` expression when ``yyaccpt`` has only one case.
- Added docu, examples and tests to ``.src.zip`` package (0.10.1 zip was repackaged).
- Fixed #1479044 incorrect code generated when using ``-b``.
- Fixed #1472770 re2c creates an infinite loop.
- Fixed #1454253 Piece of code saving a backtracking point not generated.
- Fixed #1463639 Missing forward declaration.
- Implemented #1187127 savable state support for multiple re2c blocks.
- re2c 0.10.2 has been tested with the following compilers:
    + gcc (GCC) 4.1.0 (Gentoo 4.1.0)
    + gcc version 4.0.3 (4.0.3-0.20060215.2mdk for Mandriva Linux release 2006.1)
    + gcc version 4.0.2 20050901 (prerelease) (SUSE Linux)
    + gcc (GCC) 3.4.5 (Gentoo 3.4.5, ssp-3.4.5-1.0, pie-8.7.9)
    + gcc version 3.4.4 [FreeBSD] 20050518
    + gcc version 3.4.4 (cygming special) (gdc 0.12, using dmd 0.125)
    + gcc version 3.4.2 20041017 (Red Hat 3.4.2-6.fc3)
    + gcc-Version 3.3.5 (Debian 1:3.3.5-13)
    + gcc-Version 3.3.0 (mips-sgi-irix6.5/3.3.0/specs)
    + MIPSpro Compilers: Version 7.4.4m
    + Microsoft (R) 32-bit C/C++ Optimizing Compiler Version 14.00.50727.42 for 80x86 (Microsoft Visual C++ 2005)
    + Microsoft (R) 32-bit C/C++ Optimizing Compiler Version 13.10.3077 for 80x86 (Mictosoft Visual C++ 2003)
    + Microsoft (R) 32-bit C/C++ Optimizing Compiler Version 13.00.9466 for 80x86 (Microsoft Visual C++ 2002)
    + Intel(R) C++ Compiler for Intel(R) EM64T-based applications, Version 9.0 Build 20050430 Package ID: l_cc_p_9.0.021
    + CC: Sun C++ 5.8 2005/10/13 (``CXXFLAGS='-library=stlport4'``)
    + bison 2.1, 1.875d, 1.875b, 1.875

0.10.1 (2006-02-28)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added support for Solaris and native SUN compiler.
- Applied #1438160 expose ``YYCTXMARKER``.
- re2c 0.10.1 has been tested with the following compilers:
    + gcc version 4.0.3 (4.0.3-0.20060215.2mdk for Mandriva Linux release 2006.1)
    + gcc version 4.0.2 (4.0.2-1mdk for Mandriva Linux release 2006.1)
    + gcc version 4.0.2 20050901 (prerelease) (SUSE Linux)
    + gcc version 3.4.4 (cygming special) (gdc 0.12, using dmd 0.125)
    + gcc-Version 3.3.5 (Debian 1:3.3.5-13)
    + gcc-Version 3.3.0 (mips-sgi-irix6.5/3.3.0/specs)
    + MIPSpro Compilers: Version 7.4.4m
    + Microsoft (R) 32-bit C/C++ Optimizing Compiler Version 14.00.50727.42 for 80x86 (Microsoft Visual C 2005)
    + Microsoft (R) 32-bit C/C++ Optimizing Compiler Version 13.00.9466 for 80x86 (Microsoft Visual C 2002)
    + Intel(R) C++ Compiler for 32-bit applications, Version 9.0 Build 20051130Z Package ID: W_CC_C_9.0.028
    + CC: Sun C++ 5.8 2005/10/13 (``CXXFLAGS='-compat5 -library=stlport4'``)
    + bison 2.1, 1.875d, 1.875b, 1.875

0.10.0 (2006-02-18)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added make target ``zip`` to create windows source packages as zip files.
- Added ``re2c:startlabel`` configuration.
- Fixed code generation to not generate unreachable code for initial state.
- Added support for c/c++ compatible ``\u`` and ``\U`` unicode notation.
- Added ability to control indendation.
- Made scanner error out in case an ambiguous ``/*`` is found.
- Fixed indendation of generated code.
- Added support for DOS line endings.
- Added experimental unicode support.
- Added ``config_w32.h`` to build out of the box on windows (using msvc 2002+).
- Added Microsoft Visual C .NET 2005 build files.
- Applied #1411087 variable length trailing context.
- Applied #1408326 do not generate ``goto`` next state.
- Applied #1408282 ``CharSet`` initialization fix.
- Applied #1408278 ``readsome`` with MSVC.
- Applied #1307467 Unicode patch for 0.9.7.
