-----
0.13x
-----

0.13.7.5 (2014-08-22)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Fixed `Gentoo bug with PHP lexer <https://bugs.gentoo.org/show_bug.cgi?id=518904>`_

0.13.7.4 (2014-07-29)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Enabled ``make docs`` only if configured with ``--enable-docs``
- Disallowed to use yacc/byacc instead of bison to build parser
- Removed non-portable sed feature in script that runs tests

0.13.7.3 (2014-07-27)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Fixed CXX warning
- Got rid of asciidoc build-time dependency

0.13.7.2 (2014-07-27)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Included man page into dist, respect users CXXFLAGS.

0.13.7.1 (2014-07-26)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added missing files to tarball

0.13.7 (2014-07-25)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added UTF-8 support
- Added UTF-16 support
- Added default rule
- Added option to control ill-formed Unicode

0.13.6 (2013-07-04)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Fixed #2535084 uint problem with Sun C 5.8
- #3308400: allow Yacc-style ``%{`` code brackets ``}%``
- #2506253: allow C++ ``//`` comments
- Fixed inplace configuration in ``-e`` mode.
- Applied #2482572 Typos in error messages.
- Applied #2482561 Error in manual section on ``-r`` mode.
- Fixed #2478216 Wrong ``start_label`` in ``-c`` mode.
- Fixed #2186718 Unescaped backslash in file name of ``#line`` directive.
- Fixed #2102138 Duplicate case labels on EBCDIC.
- Fixed #2088583 Compile problem on AIX.
- Fixed #2038610 Ebcdic problem.
- improve dot support: make char intervals (e.g. ``[A-Z]``) instead of one edge per char

0.13.5 (2008-05-25)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Fixed #1952896 Segfault in ``re2c::Scanner::scan``.
- Fixed #1952842 Regression.

0.13.4 (2008-04-05)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added transparent handling of ``#line`` directives in input files.
- Added ``re2c:yyfill:check`` inplace configuration.
- Added ``re2c:define:YYSETSTATE:naked`` inplace configuration.
- Added ``re2c:flags:w`` and ``re2c:flags:u`` inplace configurations.
- Added the ability to add rules in ``use:re2c`` blocks.
- Changed ``-r`` flag to accept only ``rules:re2c`` and ``use:re2c`` blocks.

0.13.3 (2008-03-14)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added ``-r`` flag to allow reuse of scanner definitions.
- Added ``-F`` flag to support flex syntax in rules.
- Fixed SEGV in scanner that occurs with very large blocks.
- Fixed issue with unused ``yybm``.
- Partial support for flex syntax.
- Changed to allow ``/*`` comments with ``-c`` switch.
- Added flag ``-D/--emit-dot``.

0.13.2 (2008-02-14)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added flag ``--case-inverted``.
- Added flag ``--case-insensitive``.
- Added support for ``<!...>`` to enable rule setup.
- Added support for ``=>`` style rules.
- Added support for ``:=`` style rules.
- Added support for ``:=>`` style rules.
- Added ``re2c:cond:divider`` and ``re2c:cond:goto`` inplace configuration.
- Fixed code generation to emit space after ``if``.

0.13.1 (2007-08-24)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added custom build rules for Visual Studio 2005 (``re2c.rules``). (William Swanson)
- Fixed issue with some compilers.
- Fixed #1776177 Build on AIX.
- Fixed #1743180 ``fwrite`` with 0 length crashes on OS X.

0.13.0 (2007-06-24)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added ``-c`` and ``-t`` to generate scanners with (f)lex-like condition support.
- Fixed issue with short form of switches and parameter if not first switch.
- Fixed #1708378 segfault ``in actions.cc``.
