============
Release 0.15
============

This release started out in the spring of 2015 as a relatively simple code cleanup.

I focused on the following problem: re2c used to repeat the whole generation process multiple times.
Some parts of the generated program depend on the overall input statistics;
they cannot be generated until the whole input has been processed.
The usual strategy is to make stubs for all such things and fix them later.
Instead, re2c used to process the whole input, gather statistics,
discard the generated output, and regenerate it from scratch.
Moreover, each generation pass further duplicated certain calculations (for similar reasons).
As a result, the code generation phase was repeated four times.

The problem here is not inefficiency: re2c is fast enough to allow the 4x overhead.
The real problem is the complexity of the code: you have to think of multiple execution layers all the time.
Some parts of code are only executed on certain layers and affect each other.
Simple reasoning gets really hard.

So the main purpose of this release was to simplify the code and make it easier to fix bugs and add new features.
However, very soon I realized that some of the changes in code generation are hard to verify by hand.
For example, even a minor rebalancing of ``if`` and ``switch`` statements
may change the generated code significantly.
In search of an automatic verification tool, I encountered the idea of generating `skeleton <../../manual/features/skeleton/skeleton.html>`_ programs.

Meanwhile I just couldn't help adding `warnings <../../manual/warnings/warnings.html>`_,
updating the build system, and fixing various bugs.
A heart-warming consequence of the code simplification is that re2c now uses re2c more extensively:
not only the main program, but also the command-line options, inplace configurations,
and all kinds of escaped strings are parsed with re2c.
I also updated the website (feel free to suggest improvements).

Here is the list of all the changes:

.. include:: ../changelog/0_15_list.rst


