Release 2.2
===========

This release adds scoping rules and improves code sharing between re2c blocks.
It brings in a bunch of new features, most importantly named blocks, local
blocks, scoped directives and the ability to include arbitrary blocks in the
middle of another block. Much work has been done on improving testing and
continuous integration.

**Local blocks.**
This release adds a new kind of blocks: ``/*!local:re2c ... */``, which are
exactly like the usual ``/*!re2c ... */`` blocks, except that they do not add
their named definitions and configurations to the global scope. The contents of
a local block are not visible outside of the block and do not affect subsequent
blocks.

**Named blocks.**
Previously all re2c blocks were anonymous. Now it is possible to give block a
name: for example, ``/*!re2c:woot42 ... */`` defines a global block named
``woot42``. The name can be used to refer to this block in other parts of the
program (for example in
:ref:`directives <manual/manual_c:blocks and directives>`). Rules blocks can
have names as well: a block ``/*!rules:re2c:woot42 ... */`` can be mentioned in
a use block ``/*!use:woot42 ... */`` or in a use directive ``!use:woot42;``.
Use blocks cannot have their own name; if you need to have a named block that
reuses another block, do that with the new ``!use`` directive.

**Block lists in directives.**
Previously re2c :ref:`directives <manual/manual_c:blocks and directives>`
such as ``max:re2c``, ``stags:re2c``, ``getstate:re2c`` etc. were global: they
accumulated the information across all blocks in the file. Now it is possible to
specify a list of colon-separated block names in each directive: for example
``/*!<directive>:re2c:<name1>:<name2>... */`` where ``<name1>``, ``<name2>`` and
so on are the names of re2c blocks defined somewhere in the file. This allows
one to have scoped directives, and also multiple directives per file for
different groups of blocks. For example, if the file defines named blocks
``foo``, ``bar`` and ``baz``, one can define all s-tag variables in blocks
``foo`` and ``baz`` with a directive ``/*!stags:foo:baz ... */``.

**In-block use directive.**
Now it is possible to :ref:`use a block <manual/manual_c:reusable blocks>` in
the middle of another block: for example, a rules block
``/*!rules:re2c:woot42 ... */`` can be used in the middle of another block with
a statement ``!use:woot42;``. Rules, named definitions and configurations of the
used block are added to those of the current block. The new use directive is
more flexible than the old ``/*!use:re2c ... */`` block, because there is no
limitation on the number of used blocks, and they don't have to be used at the
beginning of a block.

**In-block include directive.**
The existing ``/*!include ... */`` directive now has an
:ref:`in-block variant <manual/manual_c:include files>`. For example,
``!include "x/y/z.re";`` includes a file ``x/y/z.re`` in the middle of a block.
The in-block include directive works in the same way as the out-of-block one:
the contents of the file are inserted verbatim in place of the directive.

**Configurable directives.**
More :ref:`directives <manual/manual_c:blocks and directives>` can now be
customized with configurations that define the form of the generated code.
Directives ``max:re2c`` and ``maxnmatch:re2c`` now have an optional ``format``
configuration that accepts a template string with interpolated variable
``@@{max}`` (or just ``@@`` for short), for example
``/*!max:re2c format="int maxfill = @@;"; */`` would generate code
``maxfill = <N>;`` where ``<N>`` is the ``YYMAXFILL`` value.
Directive ``types:re2c`` now has optional configurations ``format`` and
``separator``: the former accepts a template string with interpolated variables
``@@{cond}`` and ``@@{num}`` (the name and numeric index of each condition), and
the latter specifies the glue text used to join different ``format`` pieces
together.

**Testing.**
`Serghei Iakovlev <https://github.com/sergeyklay>`_ ported the old and hairy
testing script from Bash to Python 3. The new script covers more platforms and
is much faster than the old one (and also easier to debug and modify).


See the changelog :ref:`releases/changelog/changelog:2.2 (2021-08-01)` for
details. As always, a big thanks to all contributors!

