Release 3.0
===========

This release adds Rust support,
a uniform naming scheme for options and configurations,
small improvements in code generation
and a few bug fixes.

**Rust backend.**
It has been on the wish-list for quite a while, but the real work has started on
`#372 <https://github.com/skvadrik/re2c/issues/372>`_ with
`raekye <https://github.com/raekye/>`_ doing the initial implementation and
`pmetzger <https://github.com/pmetzger/>`_ porting the first examples.
After a few weeks of brainstorming on `irc.oftc.net <https://www.oftc.net/>`_
(``#re2c``), followed by a few months of work, now the Rust backend is fully
implemented and ready to use.
See the :ref:`re2rust manual <manual/manual_rust:introduction>` with examples.

The main difficulty with Rust is that it has no ``goto`` statement, which makes
the usual code generation approach impossible. Normally re2c uses *goto-label*
approach: DFA states are blocks of code with labels, and transitions are
``goto`` statements. For Rust a different approach is needed: a DFA is
represented with a switch on a numeric state variable, where each state is a
separate case. Transitions set state variable to the target state index and loop
to the start of the switch. The *loop-switch* approach can be used for other
languages as well, therefore it has been added as an option ``--loop-switch``
(available for all backends and mandatory for Rust).
The new approach is different enough to require multiple changes in code
generation. In loop-switch mode it is impossible to jump into the middle of a
state bypassing the skip statement, so the ``--eager-skip`` option is enforced,
which moves skip statements to transitions. With conditions it is impossible to
jump between different blocks, so DFAs for all conditions are merged into one
switch, and condition numbers are the indices of the initial DFA states. In
storable state mode it is impossible to jump from the ``YYGETSTATE`` switch to a
DFA state, therefore a separate ``getstate:re2c`` detached from the lexer block
is not supported. Most of these implementation details are hidden from the user.

:ref:`Generic API <manual/manual_rust:program interface>` is set by default for
Rust, as the use of pointer arithmetic is unsafe and generally discouraged.
The ``YYPEEK`` operation is automatically wrapped in ``unsafe`` because it should
avoid bounds checks, which are done by the lexer in a
:ref:`more efficient way <manual/manual_rust:handling the end of input>`.
To get rid of the automatic ``unsafe`` wrappers use option ``--no-unsafe`` or
configuration ``re2c:unsafe`` on a per-block basis (this can help to verify
lexer behavior in debug mode, for example).

Initialization of ``yych`` in the generated code is prefixed with
``#[allow(unused_assignments)]``. In fact initialization is not needed (``yych``
is always set before it is used), but the Rust compiler cannot figure it out in
cases with complex control flow and emits errors if initialization is missing.

Rust backend and the new ``re2rust`` binary are enabled by default, but the
build can be configured with ``--enable-rust``, ``--disable-rust`` Autoconf
options or ``-DRE2C_BUILD_RE2RUST`` CMake option.

**New aliases.**
Some configurations that have been added over the years are at odds with the
general naming scheme. For example, most of condition-related configurations
have ``re2c:cond:`` prefix, as in ``re2c:cond:goto`` or ``re2c:cond:divider``,
but for some reason ``re2c:condprefix`` has no column after ``cond``. It is
illogical, and it would be better to have ``re2c:cond:prefix`` instead. This
release adds a bunch of such aliases. Of course, the old names still work, and
there is no plan to remove them (the change does not break existing code).
Likewise some options have new aliases. For a full list see the
:ref:`changelog <releases/changelog/changelog:3.0 (2022-01-27)>`.

**Code generation.**
The changes in code generation are minor. The main difference is in the state
enumeration: states without incoming transitions do not have numbers anymore.
This was required for the loop-switch approach, so that switch cases can have
consecutive labels. Other code generation changes include removal of unused
``YYPEEK`` statements and slightly different formatting.

For a full list of changes and bug fixes see the changelog
:ref:`releases/changelog/changelog:3.0 (2022-01-27)`.
Huge thanks to all contributors, especially
`raekye <https://github.com/raekye/>`_  and
`pmetzger <https://github.com/pmetzger/>`_!

